Fossil Energy Graph:


1. Import Libraries:

sys for command-line argument handling.

pandas for reading and manipulating data.

matplotlib.pyplot for creating the graph.


2. Function generate_fossil_energy_graph:

Loads the energy data and country list from the CSV files.

Checks if the provided country name exists in the country list.

Filters the energy data for the specified country.

Extracts the years, oil, gas, and coal consumption data.

Plots the data and saves the graph as an image file.


3. Command-Line Argument Handling:

Ensures the script is run with exactly one argument (the country name).

Calls the generate_fossil_energy_graph function with the provided country name.




Sustainable Energy Pie Charts:


1. Import Libraries:

sys for command-line argument handling.

pandas for reading and manipulating data.

matplotlib.pyplot for creating the graph.

matplotlib.patches is used to create custom legend elements


2. Loading the Datasets and Validation:
 
The script reads two CSV files: owid-energy-data.csv (containing energy data) and countries.csv (containing a list of valid countries).

The script checks if the provided countries exist in the countries.csv file. If a country is not found, it prints an error message and exits the function.


3. Filtering by Year: 

The script filters the energy_data DataFrame to include only the rows for the specified year. If no data is found for that year, it prints an error message and exits the function.


4. Creating Subplots, Ensuring Iterable axs and Defining Colors:

Creating Subplots:
The script creates a figure with a number of subplots equal to the number of countries. The subplots are arranged in a single row. The size of the figure is adjusted based on the number of countries.

Ensuring Iterable axs:
If there is only one country, axs is converted to a list to ensure it can be iterated over.

Color Palette:
A dictionary mapping energy types to specific colors is created. This ensures consistency in color usage across all pie charts.


5. Generating Pie Charts: 

Filtering Data for Each Country: 
For each country, the script filters the year_data DataFrame to include only the rows for that country. If no data is found for a country, it prints an error message and exits the function.

Extracting Data: 
The script extracts the consumption values for hydro, solar, biofuel, and wind energy from the filtered data.

Plotting Pie Charts: 
The script generates a pie chart for each country using the extracted data and the specified color palette. The country name is set as the title for each subplot.


6. Adding Legend and Title:

Adding Legend: 
The script creates custom legend elements using the color_palette and adds them to the figure. The loc parameter specifies the legend location, ncol=1 ensures the items are stacked vertically, and the title parameter adds a title to the legend.

Setting Main Title: 
The script sets a main title for the entire figure using plt.suptitle.

Adjusting Layout: 
The plt.tight_layout method is used to adjust the layout, ensuring there is enough space for the main title and legend.

Saving and Displaying the Figure: 
The script saves the figure as a PNG file and displays it.


7. Main Script Execution:

Argument Parsing: 
The script checks the number of arguments provided. If the number of arguments is not between 3 and 6, it prints the usage instructions and exits.

Calling the Function: 
The script extracts the year and countries from the command-line arguments and calls the generate_sustainable_energy_pie_charts function with these arguments.




Top 5 Countries Bar Graph:


1. Import Libraries:

sys for command-line argument handling.

pandas for reading and manipulating data.

matplotlib.pyplot for creating the graph.

numpy for numerical operations.


2. Function Definition and Loading Dataset:

generate_top5_bar_graph(criteria):
Takes one argument criteria to specify the type of data to be visualized.

data = pd.read_csv('owid-energy-data_A_S.csv'): 
Loads the main dataset.

valid_countries = pd.read_csv('countries.csv')['country'].tolist(): 
Loads the list of valid countries.


3. Filtering Data:

data = data[data['country'].isin(valid_countries)]: 
Filters the data to include only valid countries.

data_2020 = data[data['year'] == 2020]: 
Filters the data for the year 2020.


4. Criteria Validation:

Maps criteria to respective column names.

Checks if the provided criteria is valid.


5. Data Preparation:

Filters and cleans data based on the selected criteria.

Converts GDP values from scientific notation to regular numbers if needed.


6. Top 5 Countries + Canada:

Identifies the top 5 countries excluding Canada based on the selected criteria for 2020.

Includes Canada in the list of countries for comparison.


7. Historical Data:

Filters data for the past 10 years (2011-2020) for the selected countries.

Pivots the data to have countries as columns and years as rows.

Sorts columns by 2020 values in descending order.


8. Plotting:

Sets up the figure and axis for the bar graph.

Defines bar width and positions with gaps between groups of bars.

Customizes bar colors.

Plots bars for each country.

Highlights the year with maximum values (2020) with annotations.

Sets axis labels and title based on the selected criteria.

Adds a legend and grid to the plot.

Adjusts the layout for better appearance.


9. Saving and Showing Plot:

Saves the plot as a PNG file with a descriptive filename.

Displays the plot.


10. Main Script Execution:

Checks if the correct number of command-line arguments is provided.

Calls the generate_top5_bar_graph function with the specified criteria.




Electricity Generation Stacked Graph:


1. Import Libraries:

sys for command-line argument handling.

pandas for reading and manipulating data.

matplotlib.pyplot for creating the graph.

numpy for numerical operations.


2. Defining the Function:

The function takes a year as an input and generates the stacked bar chart for that year.


3. Loading and Filtering the Dataset:

The dataset containing energy data is loaded.

A list of valid countries is loaded from countries.csv.

The data is filtered to include only rows where the country is in the list of valid countries.

The data is filtered to include only rows for the specified year.


4. Selecting Relevant Columns:

The relevant columns for different electricity generation sources are selected.

Rows with any missing values in these columns are dropped.


5. Calculating Total Electricity Generation:

A new column, total_generation, is added to the DataFrame, representing the total electricity generation for each country by summing up the values of the selected columns.


6. Selecting the Top 10 Countries:

The data is sorted by total_generation in descending order.

The top 10 countries with the highest total electricity generation are selected.

The total_generation column is dropped as it’s no longer needed for plotting.


7. Setting Index and Renaming Columns:

The index of the DataFrame is set to country for easier plotting.

Custom colors are defined for each electricity source.

A dictionary is created to map the original column names to custom legend names.

The columns in the DataFrame are renamed using the custom legend names.


8. Plotting the Data:

The DataFrame is plotted as a stacked bar graph using the custom colors.

Titles and labels for the plot are added.

A legend with a title is added.

Grid lines are enabled for better readability.

The layout is adjusted to ensure everything fits well.

The plot is saved as a PNG file and displayed.


9. Main Script Execution:

The script checks if the correct number of command-line arguments is provided.

If the correct number of arguments is provided, the year is extracted from the command-line arguments and passed to the function generate_electricity_generation_stacked_graph.   